###Swedenborg's Life###

The life of Emanuel Swedenborg (1688–1772) was steeped simultaneously in the rational world of the physical sciences and in a deep Christian faith. He lived during the height of the Enlightenment, a period when intellectuals rejected dogmatic religious teachings in favor of science and reason, and his theology reflects a long struggle to understand the world of spirit through investigation of the physical world. Ultimately, that struggle was resolved when (as he described it) his spiritual senses were opened and he began to interact directly with the denizens of heaven, hell, and the world of spirits in between. Although his theological writings are based on experiences and visions that may seem unbelievable to a modern audience—as they did to many of Swedenborg’s contemporaries—he writes with full awareness of how difficult his accounts may be to accept. In keeping with his early scholarly training, he presents his ideas in a logical order, drawing examples from everyday life as proof of the truth of his words, inviting readers to judge for themselves.

@@@Early Years@@@
Born Emanuel Swedberg in Stockholm, Sweden, on January 29, 1688, he was the second son of Jesper Swedberg, a pastor in Sweden’s Lutheran state church. At the age of eleven Emanuel entered the University of Uppsala, where his father was a professor. Although Jesper left the university to become bishop of Skara a few years later, Emanuel remained at Uppsala, completing his studies in 1709. As was customary for wealthy young Swedish men of his time, he then journeyed abroad to expand on what he had learned. His first stop was England—a worldwide center of learning and a major maritime power—where he studied the observational techniques of royal astronomer John Flamsteed (1646–1719) and traveled in the same intellectual circles as luminaries like Sir Isaac Newton (1643–1727) and Edmund Halley (1656–1742). Emanuel also studied geology, botany, zoology, and the mechanical sciences under a number of scholars, inventors, and mechanics, later continuing those studies in Amsterdam and Paris.

When he returned to Sweden more than five years later, he worked as an assistant to Swedish inventor Christopher Polhem (1661–1751). As a result of the association, Emanuel was introduced to Sweden’s King Charles XII (1682–1718), who was impressed with Emanuel’s intellect and arranged for him to be given a position at the Board of Mines. The appointment was significant and prestigious because at that time the mines were a vital part of Sweden’s economy. The position suited Emanuel, not only because of family connections to the mining industry, but because it gave him ample opportunities for scientific research. After Charles XII’s death in 1718, his sister Ulrika Eleonora (1688–1741) ascended to the throne. In 1719, she ennobled the Swedberg family, changing their name to Swedenborg, the name by which Emanuel is known today.

@@@Scientific Research@@@
During this early period, most of Swedenborg’s intellectual energy was funneled into scientific and technical work. In the years immediately following his return to Sweden, he published a scientific journal titled Daedalus Hyperboreus. Although the journal was intended to highlight Polhem’s accomplishments, it also included a number of Swedenborg’s own ideas and inventions, including plans for a flying machine. The journal was followed by books on chemistry and physics, as well as the first book in Swedish on algebra.

Swedenborg’s first major publication was Opera Philosophica et Mineralia (Philosophical and Metallurgical Works), a three-volume set printed in 1734. Philosophical and Metallurgical Works was written in Latin and published abroad for circulation to an international audience. While the second and third volumes—one on iron and the other on copper and brass—attracted attention for their technical information on metallurgy, it was the first volume, titled Principia Rerum Naturalium (Basic Principles of Nature), that laid the philosophical groundwork for Swedenborg’s later investigations into the nature of the soul.

Philosophical and Metallurgical Works was followed by a series of books on anatomy. The first of these, the two-volume Oeconomia Regni Animalis (Dynamics of the Soul’s Domain), was published in 1740 and 1741. The first volume addresses the heart and blood; the second, the brain, nervous system, and the soul. Here again, Swedenborg was looking for a connection between the spiritual and physical worlds. Drawing on the works of contemporary scientists and philosophers, he describes a subtle spiritual fluid that permeates and sustains all living creatures, existing in a complicated interaction with the blood and the cerebrospinal fluid. The origin of life is a sustaining energy that pervades all of creation, and the source of that energy is God. Thus nature, in Swedenborg’s view, derives life in all its forms from that creative energy and would be dead without divine influence.

Although Dynamics of the Soul’s Domain sold well and received favorable reviews, Swedenborg himself wasn’t satisfied, and almost immediately began work on a series of follow-up volumes that dealt with anatomy in more depth. He published three volumes in this series, titled Regnum Animale (The Soul’s Domain), and wrote drafts of several more, but that work was interrupted by a time of spiritual crisis which would mark the beginning of his visionary period.

@@@Spiritual Crisis@@@
Beginning in 1743 and continuing throughout 1744, Swedenborg experienced intense dreams and visions at night, which he recorded in his personal diary. Many of them revolved around a sense of spiritual unworthiness, a feeling that he had to purify himself of sin. In one dream, a man appeared and asked him if he had a health certificate; Swedenborg interpreted this as Christ asking him if he were prepared to undertake a spiritual vocation. In another case several months later, he was thinking about his work and heard a voice say, “Hold your tongue or I will strike you!” This Swedenborg understood as a warning against immersing himself in worldly tasks on a Sunday.

The opening of his spiritual vision—by day, in a state of full wakefulness—began in April 1745, although the exact circumstances surrounding it remain mysterious and a matter of debate. From this point onward, he began to record experiences of being in contact with the spiritual world.

Swedenborg simultaneously started writing an exploration of the inner meaning of the Bible based on the new understanding he gained from his visions. In the beginning, it appears to have been difficult for him; he left the initial drafts of this exposition unpublished. In 1747, he refused a promotion that had been offered to him, instead petitioning the king to be released from his service on the Board of Mines so he could devote himself full time to theological writing.

@@@Theological Writings@@@
Swedenborg published his first theological work, Arcana Coelestia (Secrets of Heaven) in 1749; the eighth and final volume was published in 1756. He chose to publish the book in London, in part to avoid Sweden’s strict anti-heresy laws, but also because he felt that London was the best intellectual atmosphere for an entirely new way of looking at Scripture.

Secrets of Heaven is a verse-by-verse discussion of the inner meaning of the Bible, beginning with Genesis and then moving through Exodus. Swedenborg writes that the Bible should not be taken literally—in fact, parts of it make no sense if taken at face value—but everything written there has an inner spiritual meaning he calls a “correspondence.” Interspersed between the chapters of commentary are explanations of principles that would become key parts of Swedenborg’s theology: the correspondence between the physical world and the spiritual world, the structure of heaven and hell and the lives of angels and devils, the interaction between the soul and body, and the interconnectedness of faith and charity.

Although it seems that Swedenborg intended to go through the entire Bible in this type of verse-by-verse exegesis, he never did so. Instead, he returned to London in 1758 with five new titles to publish: Heaven and Hell, a description of the afterlife and the lives of its inhabitants; White Horse, which talks about the inner meaning of the Bible; Other Planets, which describes the beings that live on other planets, some within and some outside our solar system; Last Judgment; and New Jerusalem. These last two refer to a unique aspect of Swedenborg’s theology. He writes that the Last Judgment is not a future event that will mark the end of our world, but a spiritual event where evil spirits who had managed to infiltrate heaven were cast down to hell, allowing human beings on earth and in heaven to receive spiritual truths more clearly. Further, he claims to have witnessed this event in 1757, a year that marked the beginning of a new spiritual age for humankind. In New Jerusalem, he lays out the general principles for the new church that was to follow the Last Judgment.

With the exception of Last Judgment, the content of the five volumes he published in 1758 was taken from Secrets of Heaven, sometimes with very little revision. Secrets of Heaven had been published anonymously, and its initial sales were very poor. Separating elements of this magnum opus into smaller volumes may have been an attempt to make the content more accessible.

@@@Stories of Seership@@@
Starting in 1759, however, a series of incidents demonstrating Swedenborg’s interactions with the spirit world drew international attention. The first, in July 1759, happened while Swedenborg was attending a dinner party in the Swedish city of Göteborg. During the party, he suddenly became agitated and began describing a fire in Stockholm—more than 250 miles away—that was threatening his home. Two hours later, he reported that the fire had been extinguished three doors down from his house. It was not until two days later that messengers from Stockholm arrived in Göteborg and confirmed the details as Swedenborg had relayed them.

In 1760, the widow of the recently deceased French ambassador to Sweden was presented with a bill for a very expensive silver service her husband had bought. She was sure he had paid, but could not find the receipt. After asking Swedenborg for help, she had a dream in which her husband revealed the location of the receipt, a dream which turned out to be accurate.

In 1761, Swedenborg was presented at the court of Sweden’s Queen Louisa Ulrika (1720–1782), and she asked him to relay a particular question to her deceased brother, Prince Augustus Wilhelm of Prussia (1722–1758). Swedenborg returned to court three weeks later and gave her the answer privately, upon which she was heard to exclaim that only her brother would have known what Swedenborg had just told her.

These three well-documented incidents, in conjunction with some others, made Swedenborg the subject of conversation not just in his own country, but in continental Europe as well. The attention prompted Swedenborg to acknowledge that he was the author of the books he had written, although it was not until Marriage Love in 1768 that the books were printed with his name.

@@@Later Works@@@
In the years that followed the incidents described above, Swedenborg would publish several more key theological works: Divine Love and Wisdom (1763), Divine Providence (1764), Revelation Unveiled (1766), and Marriage Love (1768). Divine Love and Wisdom and Divine Providence, although published separately, could be taken as two parts of the same theme: The first deals with the nature of God, who in his essence is both love and wisdom, and—echoing Swedenborg’s earlier works on the origin of the material world—is the source of all life. Divine Providence tackles free will and the nature of evil and suffering, and describes the spiritual laws that govern the world.

Revelation Unveiled is a return to Swedenborg’s early discourse on the inner meaning of the Bible, this time examining the book of Revelation in much the same verse-by-verse format as Secrets of Heaven. Revelation Unveiled was the first book in which Swedenborg included what he called memorabilia (memorable occurrences): descriptions of encounters with angels, devils, or spirits, usually illustrating a theological point he wanted to make. These memorable occurrences were generally added to the end of a chapter and often had no apparent connection to what he had written immediately before, although in two personal letters he advised people to read the memorable occurrences before moving on to the main text.

Contrary to its title, Marriage Love deals with love between the sexes in all its aspects, including sexual relations outside of marriage. Swedenborg considered married love to be the highest form of connection between a man and a woman. He writes that the masculine and feminine aspects of human beings are complementary. In heaven, where our true natures are fully revealed, a man and a woman who share real compatibility will instantly know each other when they meet, and eventually will become joined in spirit as if they were one person. That person is not necessarily an earthly spouse. People who are in unhappy marriages on earth, or who never marry, may still find true love once they move on to heaven—a teaching that may have had personal significance for Swedenborg, who was never married.

@@@Charges of Heresy@@@
All of Swedenborg’s theological books were written in Latin and published outside of Sweden, most often in London or Amsterdam. This was doubtless a deliberate strategy to avoid running afoul of Sweden’s strict censorship laws, which forbade publishing anything that contradicted the teachings of the Lutheran state church. Although Swedenborg was never the direct target of an investigation, two of his followers were charged with heresy in 1769 after publishing books and articles about Swedenborg’s ideas in Swedish. During the course of the trial, Swedenborg’s published theological works also came under question. When a royal ruling was finally rendered in 1770, it was decreed that Swedenborg’s books contained errors of doctrine, but were not heretical. Swedenborg’s books were banned, and the two followers were forced out of their teaching positions.

Partly in response to the initial news of these charges, Swedenborg began work on True Christianity (1771), a systematic discussion of his theological ideas as they relate to many aspects of Christian (and specifically Lutheran) belief. In the process, he laid out a road map for the new church that he believed was to come.

Swedenborg himself expresses no desire to be revered as a prophet or to be the founder of a new religious movement; when he talks about the “new church” or the “new Jerusalem,” he is referring to a shift in the way that humanity as a whole experiences and practices religion. In various places throughout his theological books, Swedenborg describes five ages in humankind’s spiritual history, from the most ancient church, when human beings were in their spiritual infancy and were most in tune with God, to the fourth age, Christianity, when people possessed true teachings in the form of the Word (the Bible), but those teachings had gradually been corrupted by human misinterpretation. In the coming fifth age, a completely new religion would emerge in which people would have a much clearer and more direct understanding of spiritual truth.

@@@Final Days@@@
True Christianity was the last book Swedenborg published. Although the main text was printed in Amsterdam, Swedenborg traveled to London to publish a supplement. That supplement was not printed during his lifetime. In December 1771, while still in London, Swedenborg suffered a stroke. Though he partially recovered, he seemed to sense that he was not long for this world. In February, in response to a letter suggesting a meeting in six months, he responded that it would be impossible, because he would die on the twenty-ninth of the next month. True to his word, Swedenborg passed away on March 29, 1772, at the age of eighty-four.

###The Lord###

In his short work The Lord, published about midway through his theological career, Swedenborg opens by quoting the book of John:

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. He was in the beginning with God. All things were made through him, and nothing that was made came about without him. . . . And the Word became flesh and lived among us; and we saw his glory, glory like that of the only-begotten child of the Father. (John 1:1-3, 14; as quoted in The Lord #1)

“We can see from this,” Swedenborg concludes, “that the Lord is God from eternity and that he himself is that Lord who was born into the world” (The Lord #1).

Throughout his writings, Swedenborg consistently uses the term the Lord (Latin Dominus) to refer equally to the infinite, omnipotent creator of the universe and to the human incarnation known as Jesus Christ. However, in works where he discusses the nature of Deity in detail, he often uses the name Jehovah, the Latin Deus (God), or the neuter Divinum (the Divine) to refer specifically to the infinite and uncreated aspect of Deity, while the Lord refers to Jesus. He only occasionally uses the name Jesus Christ.

@@@God as Human@@@
Swedenborg asserts in many places that God is not only human, but uniquely, definitively so. We in fact are truly human only to the extent that we live according to divine principles. Swedenborg therefore rejects the notion of a single human being who lives in heaven and walks around performing miraculous feats. God’s essence, Swedenborg tells us, exists outside of space and time, and therefore is truly infinite and eternal. God is human in the sense that that he is the source of all love and wisdom:

God, as the source of what is good and true, is their essence. Since we cannot deny this, we cannot deny that God is a person, since none of these things can exist apart from a person. (Divine Love and Wisdom #286)

Likewise, a human being living on earth is not human because of his or her body, but because of his or her ability to embody this divine nature:

All earthly individuals are born in the human form as to their physical bodies. This is because our spirit, which is also called our soul, is a person; and it is a person because it is receptive of love and wisdom from the Lord. To the extent that our spirit or soul actually accepts love and wisdom, we become human after the death of these material bodies that we are carrying around. To the extent that we do not accept love and wisdom we become grotesque creatures, retaining some trace of humanity because of our ability to accept them. (Divine Love and Wisdom #287)

Swedenborg goes on to say that God created the universe out of his eternal essence, and all things in the universe reflect a divine design that leads back to love and wisdom. That design encompasses all the functions that we see at work in our own bodies: perception (understanding truth), digestion and breathing (taking in what is good and releasing what is not useful), circulating the good and useful to all parts of the whole, and many more.

This design is in its purest form in the spiritual world, where the angels form communities that perform these functions for the benefit of all beings. Those who prefer to live only for their own selfish concerns remove themselves from the design and consign themselves to hell.

Rationality—that is, the ability to consciously choose either good or evil—is part of God’s design, and the freedom to choose is given to all humans, that is, to all beings capable of love and wisdom regardless of origin. (In his short work Other Planets, Swedenborg describes beings from other worlds who also fit this description.) After we are born, our rational ability grows along with our bodies, until we reach the point where we can consciously choose the path to heaven or the path to hell. Eventually, we can come to realize that this freedom is not really ours, but is the Lord’s gift within us. The more that we choose to close themselves off from God and reject his love and wisdom, the more we place ourselves outside of the divine design.

God’s essence sustains even the people in the deepest hell, as it sustains the existence of everything in the universe. However, the inhabitants of hell are so far removed from God that if he were to attempt to interact with them in his pure essence, they would be destroyed instantly. God’s love for all beings is too great to permit that. Thus when the evil in hell became so great that the Lord had to intervene in order to protect the good people in heaven and everyone on earth, it was necessary for him to incarnate in the physical world as a human being.

@@@The Incarnation and the Redemption of the Human Race@@@
Swedenborg emphasizes that because the universe was created according to the divine design, God himself is bound to follow that design. How could God act against his own nature?

“To redeem people without a human manifestation,” Swedenborg writes, “would have been as impossible for God . . . as growing trees on heat and light alone if air had not been created as a medium through which they travel and earth had not been created in which the trees could grow” (True Christianity #84).

Swedenborg divides the history of humankind into a series of spiritual ages or “churches,” each of which ends with a catastrophic reckoning that results in a new relationship between human beings and God. At the start of the Christian era, he writes, human beings had so many misconceptions about God that very few were able to enter heaven, and hell was overflowing, threatening to overwhelm the good people both in heaven and on earth. It became necessary to bring genuine teachings to the people on earth, and the only way to do that was to manifest as a human being. To put it another way, divinity had to become manifest on the material level because humanity had become so materialistic.

Jesus, then, was born as a normal, physical human being to all intents and purposes, gradually growing into his full divine nature. In this process he followed the same steps as any human who undergoes spiritual rebirth, or regeneration: Through personal struggles temptations, Jesus’s ego-focused self was emptied out, making room for divine influence to flow in. This process culminated in his crucifixion: “It was not the Lord’s divine nature that suffered, it was his human nature; and then the deepest union, a complete union, took place” (True Christianity #126).

He was unique in that he was born of the Holy Spirit, with an inner divinity he called “the Father who dwells within me” (John 14:10). The ultimate union was so complete that he rose from the dead even physically.

Swedenborg argues that the suffering on the cross is not what redeemed the human race; it was what glorified the Lord. Once glorified, the Lord was able to subdue the denizens of hell, restoring balance to both heaven and earth. That was the redemption.

@@@The Trinity@@@
Raised in a devout Lutheran household (his father would become a bishop), Swedenborg was taught the concept of the Trinity from an early age. However, he was adamantly opposed to the Lutheran teaching that Father, Son, and Holy Spirit were such separate beings that the Son could placate the Father’s righteous wrath. He felt that this completely destroyed any thought of God’s oneness and ultimately led people to think of three gods rather than a single One who is the source of all creation.

Swedenborg compared Father, Son, and Holy Spirit to a person’s soul, body, and the effects that their actions produce: three different aspects of a whole that springs from a single source and acts with a unified intent.

@@@God in Other Religions@@@
Swedenborg was ahead of his time in that he saw the common ground between Christianity and other religions, and he asserts that all religions, from the ancient Greeks and Romans to the contemporary religions of Asia and Africa, started from a core belief in one God, even if they misunderstood some aspects of divine teachings and came to believe in many gods. For this reason, he said, all people of good heart and good faith, regardless of their religion or place of birth, could go to heaven after they pass out of this world.

###Body, Mind, and Soul###

Swedenborg describes a complex relationship between our body, mind, and soul—or, as he describes it, our inner spiritual self and our outer natural self. This relationship impacts everything about our spiritual growth and development both in our lives on earth and in the afterlife, starting at the moment we’re born.

In Western culture, we often think of our spiritual lives as defined by a decision to believe—and live according to—a specific religion or set of principles. For Swedenborg, a spiritual life is something that all conscious beings have as a birthright, simply by virtue of having been born into this universe. 

From the time we’re born, we start to learn things about the world and have experiences. As children, we’re very self-centered and materially focused because we have to be in order to survive. But as our minds develop, we are presented with choices: we can break out of our self-centered shell and start to develop love and empathy for others, or we can remain focused on our own needs and never grow to be more than what we’ve been. If we do choose the way of loving others and acting for the greater good, then what we’re manifesting is divine love: we become a conduit for the type of love that God has for all of creation. This, Swedenborg says, is the source of our spiritual life, which is true life.

@@@The Inner Self and the Outer Self@@@
The difference between the outer self and the inner self in Swedenborg’s writings is what you might guess from reading the words. The outer self is the material part, the body and all of its impulses and cravings, but also the things that our body does: the way we speak and act and affect the world. The inner self, on the other hand, contains what we think of as the mind: it’s the part of us that thinks, intends, feels, learns facts, comes to conclusions, and decides what to do in a given situation. But the inner self is also our spiritual nature, the part of us that connects to the Divine—in short, our soul.

If everything works as it should, then the inner self becomes a vessel that gradually fills with divine love, which in turn allows us to put divine love into action in the world. However, just as a cup can be filled with all types of fluid, our soul can also be filled with either positive or negative spiritual impulses:

The Lord has foreseen and arranged matters in such a way that the more we derive our thoughts and intentions from heaven, the more our inner spiritual self opens and takes shape. This is an opening to heaven all the way to the Lord, and a taking shape in accord with the priorities of heaven. In direct contrast, the more we derive our thoughts and intentions not from heaven but from the world, the more our inner spiritual self closes and our outer self opens. This is an opening to the world and a taking shape in accord with the priorities of this world. (New Jerusalem §43)

If we continue to close the door on heaven, we open ourselves to the influence not only of the world, but of hell itself, which is inhabited by souls who are completely driven by hate and a desire for material pleasures. It’s not a one-time choice, though: our orientation can change throughout our lives as we consciously choose to act in either loving or hateful ways. Even after we die, we can continue to learn and grow and strive to become better people; it’s only after repeatedly and consciously making hateful choices, and refusing to change even when confronted with the consequences of our actions, that we become permanently mired in hell. 

@@@The Will and the Understanding@@@
The inner self has two parts. Writing in Latin, Swedenborg called them voluntas and intellectus, typically translated into English as will and understanding, or sometimes volition and discernment.

These two parts of the mind correspond to the two fundamental aspects of God: love and wisdom, which Swedenborg describes as emanating from God the way that heat and light emanate from the sun. Just as love is an emotion that drives us, the will is the part of our mind that moves us to act, the part of us that intends for things to happen. The understanding is the part of our mind that thinks and comes to conclusions; if it is open to heavenly influences, then the conclusions that the understanding reaches are true and wise in that they reflect the way the universe actually works.

In spiritual growth, the will and the understanding work reciprocally. For example, if you know intellectually that you should be kind to people even when they’re rude to you, and you force yourself to act lovingly even when you’re angry, eventually you’ll find that your will “catches up” and the loving emotions come. On the other hand, if you truly want to grow but you don’t know how, your understanding can help you find ways to do it. 

###Ruling, or Dominant, Love###

If someone were to ask you who or what you love more than anything else, you might think of a person, a place, or an activity. Perhaps you would try to imagine who or what is most important to you. However, when Swedenborg writes about a person’s ruling, or dominant, love, he’s talking about more than an emotion. 

What we love constitutes life itself to us: what our love is like determines what our life is like and therefore what we are like as human beings. In particular, it is the love that is dominant or supreme in us that makes us who we are.

That love has many loves that are subordinate to it, loves that derive from it. They take on various guises, but they are all nevertheless present within the dominant love, and together with it make one kingdom. The dominant love acts as the monarch or head of the rest; it governs them and works through them as intermediate goals, in order to focus on and strive for its primary and ultimate goal of all, doing this both directly and indirectly.

The object of our dominant love is what we love more than anything else. (New Jerusalem §54)

A dominant love, then, is more than just what we value; it’s who we are. 

@@@Four Types of Love@@@
Swedenborg describes dominant loves differently in different places throughout his writings, but he generally divides them into heaven-oriented, or good, loves and materially oriented, or bad, loves. 

Good loves can be broken down into two different types. The first, love of the Lord, means having not only a love of the Divine, but a desire to manifest divine goodness in the world. It’s a state of being open to divine love and wanting to make it a part of yourself to the greatest extent possible.

The second, love of the neighbor, means expressing that love to others—not only the people living next door, but everyone you meet. It means being good to people individually, but also serving the communities in which you find yourself and the world in general. It means doing your best to live in such a way that you are benefitting others. 

There are also two types of bad loves: love of the world and love of self. Love of the world can mean a desire for power or to dominate others. It can also mean a love of material things, like money or cars or nice clothes and so on. However, Swedenborg emphasizes that having or wanting material things isn’t in itself inherently bad:

We all need to make sure that we have the necessities of life, such as the food, clothing, housing, and more that are necessary for whatever civic life we are involved in. We need to provide these not only for ourselves but also for our dependents, and not only for the present time but also for the future, since unless we acquire the necessities of life for ourselves we are not in any condition to extend caring to others; we ourselves are instead in need of everything. (New Jerusalem §97)

Even aside from our daily needs, there are positive reasons why we might seek wealth or power. For example, if someone uses their money to help others, or seeks power to make a change in society for the better, they are demonstrating love of the neighbor rather than love of the world. But when a person’s primary focus is seeking wealth or power for its own sake, or if they are willing to engage in harmful behavior in order to achieve those ends, then it becomes an evil love. 

In the same way, love of self isn’t a bad thing when it refers to self-esteem. But when loving oneself crosses the line into ego and a person starts to see other people as lesser beings who can be hurt without consequence, or that person’s self-love results in getting disproportionately angry when denied even the smallest desire, their love of self takes a negative form.

@@@In the Afterlife@@@
Even though Swedenborg describes people as having ruling, or dominant, loves, in life it’s rare for us to be any one thing. We have good days and bad days; we make mistakes, have misunderstandings, and react to things based on all kinds of temporary moods. Developing a dominant love is a gradual process that consists of many different choices and crossroads throughout our lives. That’s an important part of spiritual growth, or regeneration.

However, it’s important that we do make the effort to develop good loves, not just because it will make this life better, but because it determines where we go after death:

A great deal of my experience has testified to the fact that we are our love or intention after death. All heaven is differentiated into communities on the basis of differences in the quality of love, and every spirit who is raised up into heaven and becomes an angel is taken to the community where her or his love is. When we arrive there we feel as though we are in our own element, at home, back to our birthplace, so to speak. (Heaven and Hell §479)

Ultimately, if we choose to do so, we can climb the ladder of different kinds of love to achieve the purpose for which God created the universe: union with the Divine. 

###Regeneration###

Regeneration is the word that Swedenborg uses to describe our growth as spiritual beings—a process of being “created anew” as spiritual people who are bound for heaven.

We are all born into natural, worldly life. We have no choice about this. But our birth into spiritual life is, indeed, a matter of our individual choices—choices that we make over a whole lifetime. This second birth into a life that is truly spiritual is a gradual, continual process, not a one-time event. Therefore, Swedenborg refers to it as being “regenerated” rather than being “born again.”

Throughout his writings, Swedenborg devotes a lot of time to the question of how we can grow as spiritual people. He wants people to understand that it’s not just a question of saying or even believing the right thing: we have to put our faith into action.

There are two places in Swedenborg’s books where he goes into great detail about the nature of regeneration. In True Christianity, Swedenborg describes regeneration as a three-step process, one that begins with repentance, continues with reformation, and then finally ends with regeneration (which includes the two prior steps). In the first chapter of his multivolume work Secrets of Heaven, he breaks down the process even further, relating each day in the creation story to a phase of regeneration.

@@@Repentance@@@
Swedenborg is careful to emphasize that “repentance,” as he defines it, doesn’t just mean confessing our sins, being forgiven, and then forgetting about it and going right back to what we were doing before. In order to truly repent, we need to change our ways.

He lists four steps in this process:

1. Examine ourselves.
We have to start by looking not only at our actions, but our motives. This doesn’t just apply to obvious sins, like theft or adultery, but also to the things we think about and dwell upon in everyday life. Have we been selfish? Egotistical? Unkind? Dishonest? Have we harbored resentments and nursed grudges when we should have been more forgiving? Have we openly or secretly controlled and manipulated others when we should have shown respect for their freedom and individuality? In declaring this as the first step in the regeneration process, Swedenborg anticipated the “searching and fearless moral inventory” of the twelve-step movement by two hundred years!

2. Recognize and admit our sins.
“Sin” can mean different things to different people. When Swedenborg talks about sin, he’s usually referring to the sins listed in the Ten Commandments (murder, adultery, stealing, and lying, for example). These are the sins that prevent us from loving our neighbor—that is, loving others in general. It’s obvious that anyone who murders, steals from, or lies to their neighbor is not acting in a loving way. But when these sins are removed, the way is opened for God to flow in with genuine love for others.

Swedenborg says that if we want to be regenerated, we have to want to manifest God’s love in the world. That’s why this step is so important. When we know what kind of a person we truly want to be, we need to recognize that we have not been acting in ways that are consistent with our highest aspirations. This is what Swedenborg means when he says that this second step is to recognize and admit our sins. We do this because we want to be better people.

3. Pray to the Lord.
An important part of this step is admitting that we need help. Ever tried to kick a bad habit? Go on a strict diet? It’s not easy. Sometimes we may experience success; at other times we find ourselves right back where we started. Much more difficult is removing those deeply ingrained traits, habits, patterns, and attitudes that prevent us from realizing our true inner nature. The removal of everything that stands in the way of our becoming fully human, loving, and wise is much more than we can handle by ourselves. That’s why Swedenborg says we need to ask God for help.

4. Begin a new life
. This is the hardest part—we have to put our intention into practice. It’s all right if we don’t always succeed, as long as we learn from our mistakes. The important thing is that we never stop trying to do better.

It’s important to remember that this part of the process does not end with prayer. It begins with prayer. After prayer, we must do all we can to work towards the spiritual goals we have set for ourselves. We must, of course, believe that God is working the miracle of inner change within us. But we must also believe that it cannot happen without our cooperation and do the necessary work. Our real efforts become the fulfillment of our prayers.

In the following passage, Swedenborg talks about many of the things we have mentioned in the first three steps. He concludes by reminding us how easy it is to read and believe these things, and yet, how hard it is to do them:

It is amazing but true that it is easy for any of us to rebuke someone else who is intending to do evil and say, ‘Don’t do that—that’s a sin!’ And yet it is difficult for us to say the same thing to ourselves. The reason is that saying it to ourselves requires a movement of the will, but saying it to someone else requires only a low level of thought based on things we have heard. . . .

All people who do good actions as a religious practice avoid actual evils. It is extremely rare, though, that people reflect on the inner realms that belong to their will. They suppose that because they are involved in good actions they are not involved in evil actions, and even that their goodness covers up their evil.

But, my friend, to abstain from evils is the first step in gaining goodwill. The Word teaches this. The Ten Commandments teach it. Baptism teaches it. The Holy Supper teaches it.

Reason, too, teaches it. How could any of us escape from our evils or drive them away without ever taking a look at ourselves? How can our goodness become truly good without being inwardly purified?

I know that all devout people and also all people of sound reason who read this will nod and see it as genuine truth; yet even so, only a few people are going to do what it says. (True Christianity #535)

@@@Reformation and Regeneration@@@
Reformation and regeneration are so closely linked that it’s easiest to think about them together, like a ramp that gradually proceeds from one level to another as opposed to two distinct steps. And in order to understand the difference between the two, it’s important to understand two key concepts from Swedenborg’s theology: the will and the intellect (also translated “volition” and “discernment” or “understanding”).

The intellect performs the activity we associate with our brain: we see or hear information, we remember it, we think about it and draw conclusions.

The will is the part of our mind that moves us, that urges us to action. In the context of regeneration, you could think of our old, unregenerated will as the egotistical part of ourselves that wants everything for itself, that wants all its desires to be satisfied, that doesn’t care about anybody else. Part of the process of regeneration is reforming the old will, or, as Swedenborg says, subjugating it so that a new will might be born within us.

The will and the intellect, together, form the mind. Our intellect is the part of us that restrains our old will from running amok. We don’t always succeed in resisting our most basic urges, but we try because we’ve learned from our parents and from society in general that certain things are wrong, and we’ll be punished if we’re caught. Swedenborg tells us that in order for regeneration to begin, we have to first learn what’s right and what’s wrong, and then decide intellectually that we’re going to change. That’s the repentance stage.

What follows is a struggle between the old will and the new intellect (or our new understanding). Our old will doesn’t want to change, and at first we have to force ourselves, with God’s help, to do the right thing. This is the reformation stage: we do good deeds, but it’s difficult. We may make excuses to be lazy, to walk past someone who needs help instead of stopping, to say no when we know we should say yes (or vice versa!). But the little voice in the back of our mind keeps reminding us to do better.

The more we do what we know is right, the more we act in a loving way, the easier it gets, and the more we want to be good. Gradually, our old will is replaced with a new will, one that comes from the Lord, and our intellect is raised up, higher and higher as we continue to think in increasingly more spiritual ways. This is regeneration.

This process continues throughout our lifetime—and beyond. “Our regeneration does not happen in a moment. It gradually unfolds from the beginning all the way to the end of our lives in this world; and after this life is over, it continues and is perfected” (True Christianity #610). In fact, it’s not possible to be fully regenerated while we are still in our physical bodies, because no matter how much good we have at the core of our being, our human nature will always try to lead us astray. But Swedenborg says that people who begin the process of regeneration are in the company of angels while still on earth, and after they die they go to join those angelic communities. There the process of human perfection continues.

This is true even of people who aren’t Christian: if a person is good and loving in this world and strives to set their ego aside in order to help others, that person is bound for heaven regardless of their faith.

###Usefulness###

Swedenborg’s concept of use (or useful service) has a simple starting point: everything that has been created exists for a reason. Just as all of nature works together to form a whole, from the tiniest particle to solar systems and galaxies, so too does every person have a reason for being—a specific purpose to fulfill.

While it is true that everyone is born to fulfill some heavenly purpose in the design of creation, some people choose to reject their God-given calling. Instead, they perform functions that are entirely self-serving.

Swedenborg tells us, “Whatever love brings forth it calls useful” (Divine Love and Wisdom #336). This works in two different ways. On one hand, there are people who love goodness and out of that love for goodness do good works (what are called “good uses” in some translations of Swedenborg’s works). On the other hand, there are people love evil, and therefore find it useful to act in selfish and cruel ways. Whatever works out best for them what they call “useful”—even if it is harmful to others. It is for this reason that Swedenborg speaks of “good uses” and “evil uses.” Because we have free will, we can decide which direction to go.

@@@In Creation@@@
Swedenborg tells us that all of creation—everything in the natural (material) world  and in the spiritual world—was created with a goal in mind. That goal is to create a heaven from the human race.

Just as the Lord is always giving us opportunities to become better people and to step onto the path to heaven, the whole of the natural world is designed to support us in that endeavor. This is the ultimate use or purpose of creation. The food chain exists to support life because we need to live in order to grow both physically and spiritually The urge to study the world and draw conclusions from it exists so that we’ll develop our minds and, as a result, make a free, rational choice to become spiritual people (or not!). Religion exists to support us on our individual journey of spiritual growth—if we choose to embark on that journey.

Because everything comes from God, everything reflects and supports the perfect order of creation. Inanimate objects like rocks, living creatures like plants and animals, all of these things have a useful function to perform that is part of this design. Even the workings of our body—growing, eating, sleeping, reproducing, and eliminating waste—exist because those uses correspond to a vital function in the spiritual realm. For example, “sleeping” corresponds to resting in the Lord; “eating” corresponds to learning spiritual truth; “eliminating” corresponds to the removal of selfish concerns, and so forth. The myriad functions that our bodies perform in so many secret ways, even without our conscious cooperation, are a reflection in miniature of that grand design in which uses are being continually performed. (For more on this, see our page on the Universal Human.)

If that’s the case, then where do harmful objects or dangerous animals come from? Are those part of the design, too? Swedenborg tells us that many of the bad things that happen in this world—disease, for example—happen because of the influence of evil spirits in the spiritual world. The Lord allows them to choose evil, and will also allow them to manifest evil in this world. By confronting those evils, we discover who we truly are, and ultimately that helps our spiritual growth. But, as we saw on the divine providence page, the Lord doesn’t allow anything to happen that doesn’t eventually produce some good and useful result.

@@@Spiritual Growth@@@
Being useful is also an important part of our spiritual growth. If we have chosen to embark on the path of regeneration and work toward becoming better people, then an essential part of that process is trying to be useful to others. This includes not only doing good deeds and helping people, but also doing our daily work well. A trash collector who does a thorough job of getting rid of people’s garbage is far more helpful to others than one who, in hurrying to finish the job, leaves trash strewn all over the street. A mother or father who stays at home with the kids is performing the very useful function of helping to bring up the next generation of society. A retired grandfather who spends his time studying astronomy might inspire one of his grandchildren to become a scientist. And sometimes, just being our true selves (the person God intends us to be), without pretending to be anything else, is the most useful thing we can do for others.

Although Swedenborg tells us it’s important to be useful to others, it’s also important to take care of ourselves. If a person quits her job to spend all of her time taking care of the homeless, that’s a very noble gesture, but without a way to support herself she’ll soon be one of the homeless people who needs care! In other words, it’s OK to think about our own needs so that we’re not doing harm to ourselves.

Swedenborg sums it up this way:

Can anyone fail to see quite clearly that the goals of creation are useful functions? Simply bear in mind that nothing can arise from God the Creator—nothing can be created, therefore—that is not useful. If it is to be useful, it must be for the sake of others. Even if it is for its own sake, it is still for others, because we are useful to ourselves in order to be fit to be useful to others. Anyone who keeps this in mind can also keep in mind the thought that functions that are truly useful cannot arise from us but from one who brings forth nothing but what is useful—the Lord. (Divine Love and Wisdom #308)

###Spiritual World (Afterlife)###

Swedenborg describes creation as made up of two separate and yet coexisting “worlds”: the natural world and the spiritual world. The natural world includes everything you see around you—the grass, the sky, houses, other people, your own body, and so on. The spiritual world consists of the unseen realities that we do not fully encounter until after death: heaven, hell, and the world of spirits in between.

In the spiritual world, people have bodies, live in houses, enjoy community life, and are surrounded by landscapes are like those of Earth, with familiar plants and animals. However, things work very differently in spiritual reality. Everything there is vivid and much more alive. What we see responds to what we are thinking. We always have all the time we need. Particular individuals are only as near or as far away as our thoughts of them, and thinking of a person or place can actually bring us there.

In short, while the spiritual world might not seem very different from ours at first, Swedenborg describes a realm where the inner state of individuals are reflected in their surroundings and where all life originates from, and is sustained by, the love and wisdom of the Lord.

@@@The Process of Crossing Over@@@
In his book Heaven and Hell, Swedenborg says that he was allowed to experience the process of dying and being awakened in the spiritual world so that he could tell people on earth what it was like. He describes how angels sat beside him, unseen by most because angels are in the spiritual world. These angels stayed with him throughout the entire transition, surrounding him with loving thoughts. He experienced the transition from a physical existence to a spiritual one as though his eyes were being opened for the first time. He was then able to see into the spiritual world. (Click here to read the entire passage in Swedenborg’s own words.)

Swedenborg says that once awakened to spiritual realities, a person might experience a number of different things, depending on what type of life he or she has led. Most people start in the world of spirits.

@@@The World of Spirits@@@
Swedenborg calls the realm we enter immediately after death the world of spirits, an intermediate realm situated between heaven and hell. It can be thought of as a “sorting out” zone from which spirits go to either heaven or hell. He describes three states that people might pass through in this realm.

In the first state, people are essentially the same as they were in life. They have all of their memories, they have the same beliefs and attitudes toward things, and they may even manifest the same surroundings that they had on earth. Swedenborg says that this is why some people who have died aren’t even aware that they are in the spiritual world, and may try to deny it if they are told so by an angel.

When people first enter the spiritual world, they often meet friends or relatives who crossed over before them. Spouses will be reunited, although not necessarily forever. The spiritual world is a place where a person’s inner nature becomes the whole of their being. If two people were truly of one mind on earth, they will live together as spouses in heaven too. However, if they were not happily married, or if their personalities are fundamentally different, they will eventually part ways. Those who did not find love on earth, Swedenborg says, will eventually find their perfect match in heaven—no one is ever alone unless they wish to be.

Friends and relatives become the new arrival’s guide to the spiritual world, and, with the help of good spirits, the person’s true inner nature will gradually be revealed. This first state might last anywhere from a few hours to a year or more, depending on how long it takes for a person’s outer nature (what they outwardly say and do) to harmonize with their inner nature (what they truly feel and believe). Anyone who has become totally transparent in this life, whether transparently loving or transparently hateful, is fully ready for either heaven or hell, and goes straight in.

In the second state after death, the person becomes aware of the deeper parts of his or her inner nature. They start saying what they really think and act according to what they feel without worrying about appearances or making other people happy. They act according to their inner values—the way someone on earth might act when nobody else is watching or when they’re sure they won’t get caught. People who are truly good inside will be kind and generous to others, while people who are inherently evil will be openly selfish and cruel. While we can all be generous or selfish sometimes, inherently good spirits will reject the selfish thoughts and work to rid themselves of those impulses, while inherently evil spirits will justify their bad behavior and thereby embrace it as part of themselves.

At this point, like is drawn to like, so the sorting out begins. No “judge” passes sentences of guilt or innocence—we seek out kindred spirits because that is where we feel at home.

For people who are ready for heaven, there is a third state, a time of instruction. It is a time for learning about heaven and how to lead a life that allows one to experience it. At this point, the person is already in touch with the community in heaven where he or she will ultimately live, but still has a lot to learn about that community—what it does, how the individual can contribute to it, how the community can fill the individual’s needs, and so on. Swedenborg goes into great detail about the lives of angels, which you can read more about on our angels page.

People who have joined a community of evil spirits, however, will continue to descend farther and farther into hell until they reach those people who are most similar to them. Swedenborg points out that this is not a punishment; it is simply the place where they feel the most comfortable. If they have freely chosen a path that is the opposite of love and wisdom, there is nothing more the angels can do for them. The most merciful thing to do is to let them live the life they have chosen.

It’s important to note that all human beings arrive in the spiritual world as equals. Regardless of their religious background or their personal beliefs, regardless of their nationality, gender, or race, all people have an equal chance to go to either heaven or hell. That decision is made by the individuals themselves, in the form of every choice they’ve made to act in either a loving way or a selfish way.

@@@Heaven@@@
Swedenborg tells us that heaven has three levels: the heavenly or celestial, the spiritual, and the natural. In keeping with the oddity of space and time in the spiritual world, he will interchangeably describe these three levels as progressing either upward or inward.

It’s common to visualize heaven as being far above us and hell as being far below us. Because it is difficult to think apart from time and space, Swedenborg also speaks in those terms. He teaches that we are surrounded by the world of spirits, with heaven above us and hell below us; those in the “highest” heaven are “closest” to the Lord, while those in the “lowest” hell are described as being farthest away. These spatial terms are useful when we consider that in common speech we say things like, “I feel very close to my cousin, even though she lives very far away.” We know that we are speaking about spiritual affinity, not geographical proximity.

At the top of everything, at the highest point, is the Lord, whom Swedenborg describes as a living sun radiating divine good and truth throughout creation.

Swedenborg, however, does not limit himself to this top-down paradigm. He also describes heaven as being human in form, with individual communities corresponding to the function of the organs in our body. (For more on this, see the page on the Universal Human.) In this view, the Lord is the center of the body, not in the literal sense of being part of its anatomy, but in the more spiritual sense of being at the “core” of the being, sustaining it just as we are sustained by our souls.

Heaven, then, is not so much a place as a collective entity made up of good people who perform an important use, much as we ourselves are made up of individual cells and atoms that are essential to the full functioning of our body. The animating force of heaven, as well as of living creatures on earth, is God’s love and wisdom. God, for Swedenborg, is not a remote being who created the universe and then retired to heaven; on the contrary, God is the very essence of life, love, and wisdom itself, the source and sustenance of all that exists. In brief, God is closer to us than the beating of our heart and the breath of our nostrils. But we only experience this closeness to the extent that we align ourselves with God’s will. This is what opens us to the influx of God’s love and wisdom—also called heaven.

While Swedenborg describes heaven as being a place of inexpressible joy and peace, he also warns that people who are not ready to experience a certain level of heaven will feel uncomfortable, even sick, and will be forced to retreat back down to lower levels until they have been properly prepared. This is even truer of spirits who are bound for hell.

@@@Hell@@@
Hell is, simply put, the part of creation that is farthest away from the Lord. If we visualize heaven as being in the form of a human being as described above, hell would be the area beneath that being’s feet.

The popular image of hell is a place of fiery torment, a pit into which God casts sinners as punishment for their crimes. The picture that Swedenborg paints is very different.

Firstly, he says, God does not judge anyone or condemn them to hell in order to punish them. Rather, it is human beings themselves who choose hell by consistently choosing to act selfishly or cruelly toward others. In other words, no one is ever sent to hell for a single act—but embracing an evil action, justifying it rather than repenting and seeking forgiveness, is the first step on the road to hell.

In Swedenborg’s experience there is no one Devil or Satan who is the counterpart to God, but he refers to the inhabitants of hell as “devils” or “satans,” and they can play the same role, tempting human beings on earth to do wrong (just as angels can try to influence them to do right). Nor is it God or the angels who torment people in hell, but people in hell who torture each other, lying and manipulating and inflicting pain on others in an attempt to dominate them and gain power.

Like the angels in heaven, all devils were once human beings; there are no beings in either heaven or hell who were not once living on earth. To angels, the inhabitants of hell are twisted and misshapen and live in buildings that are ugly, filthy, and have a horrible stench. However, to the inhabitants of hell their surroundings seem pleasant, and to each other they can even be attractive. Devils, therefore, prefer hell to heaven, and would not choose to live anywhere else even if they were given the option. They find heaven repulsive, and cannot stand its light for even a few moments. They perceive heavenly teachings as sickly sweet and may dismiss good people as being too idealistic or impractical.

Hell has different regions and levels just as heaven does, and Swedenborg will often refer to “the hells” in the plural. The deepest hells are also the darkest and coldest (since the Lord is the source of light and heat in the spiritual world). The only light and warmth in hell arises from the fires of malice that emanate from its inhabitants. Those who live in the deepest hells are the ones who embrace evil on the innermost levels of their being, who love themselves more than anything else, and who find great delight in inflicting pain on others.

###Angels and Demons###

In his writings, Swedenborg often describes things he has seen in heaven, including conversations he has had with angels there. While some traditions see angels as a supernatural class of beings, Swedenborg declares that every angel was once a human being living on earth:

On the grounds of all my experience, which has lasted for several years now, I can say with full confidence that in their form, angels are completely human. They have faces, eyes, ears, chests, arms, hands, and feet. They see each other, hear each other, and talk to each other. In short, they lack nothing that belongs to humans except that they are not clothed with a material body. (Heaven and Hell §75)

All people on earth have the potential to become angels, regardless of where they are from or what religion they practice. Swedenborg emphasizes that we are all born for heaven; if we don’t end up there, it is because of the choices that we make in life.

@@@Appearance@@@
When people shed their physical bodies and enter the spiritual world, at first they look much the same as they did on earth. Over time, however, their inner selves are revealed, and it changes the way they appear to others. Angels become more and more beautiful the closer they get to the Lord: “I have seen faces of angels of the third heaven so beautiful that no painters, with all their skill, could render a fraction of their light with their pigments or rival a thousandth part of the light and life that show in their faces” (Heaven and Hell §459).

Angels do not have halos or wings, and Swedenborg says that the clothes they wear change according to their state of being, sometimes without the angels themselves being aware their clothes have changed. Angels of the highest heavens might appear to be dressed in radiant light because bright light corresponds to wisdom.  Similarly, when the Bible speaks of people being “clothed in righteousness” (Isaiah 61:10),  it is not referring to literal clothing, but rather to people who love truth and live according to it.  The garments of angels, then, while they appear to be real, are, in actuality, correspondences of their spiritual states.

Angels all look youthful. This is because “people in heaven are continually progressing toward the springtime of life.” Swedenborg adds, “The more thousands of years they live, the more pleasant and happy is their springtime.”  This, too, is in direct correspondence to their continually deepening  spiritual states: “This continues forever, increasing according to the growth and level of their love, thoughtfulness, and faith” (Heaven and Hell §414).

Related video: What We Look Like in the Afterlife – Swedenborg & Life

@@@Daily Life@@@
Contrary to the popular image of lazy angels floating around on soft, white clouds and strumming harps, Swedenborg tells us that angels live busy lives that may not seem that different from ours. They live in houses with all the usual sorts of rooms, and their communities are organized very much like towns and cities, with streets and parks and other central buildings.

Communities in heaven are distinguished by the type of service they provide; for example, some communities may be dedicated to raising children who have crossed over (see below), while other communities may be focused on serving people who are being awakened from death. Swedenborg says that angelic tasks are so numerous, and so diverse, that it would be impossible to list them all. In general, however, angels perform the specific service for which they are best suited, and this work is one of their greatest joys.

While angels love the work that they do, they are not doing it for their own sake—they are doing it out of a love of being useful and serving others. The Lord works through angels, and this is true to such an extent that Swedenborg tells us angels won’t take credit for any of the good that they do. Everything comes from the Lord.

Related video: A Day in the Life of an Angel- Swedenborg & Life

@@@Language@@@
The language of angels, like their lives, may seem superficially like our own. Swedenborg describes their language as being like ours in that it can be spoken or written down, but also completely unlike human languages in that it can convey a much deeper meaning. Angels’ speech comes from their inner core, and therefore angels can express concepts that don’t exist in human languages, or say things in a few words that we could not say in thousands. Likewise, angels can tell everything about another person by hearing only a few words.

All angels speak the same language, regardless of where they come from or which part of heaven they live in, so they can always understand each other. They also use facial expressions and body language in much the same way that we do, but in ways that can instantaneously convey vast ideas and intricate concepts with amazing accuracy.

There are times, too, when angels are allowed to communicate with us—and we with them. While Swedenborg warns against seeking otherworldly communication, there are occasions when it is allowed to happen, usually to comfort a grieving spouse, parent or friend.  When such communication occurs, angels seem to speak in our native language.

Related video: How Spirits Talk- Swedenborg & Life

@@@Children@@@
Swedenborg tells us that because we are all born for heaven, and because children have not yet had the chance to make life choices that might have distanced them from God, all children who leave this world are immediately taken up to heaven and become angels.

When children first arrive in heaven, they look just as they did on earth—babies are still babies, children still appear to be the same age they were when they crossed over. They are raised by angels who particularly love children, and who enjoy teaching them spiritual truths. Gradually these children grow to adulthood and are welcomed into angelic communities that perfectly correspond to the innate gifts, talents, and capacities of the children.

Later on, when family members cross over, they and the children of those families are reunited, though if they have different natures they will ultimately end up living in different spiritual communities. This, however, is not a sadness but a joy—for all must eventually find that place where they are most at home and where their innate gifts can find fullest expression.

Related video: Children in Heaven- Swedenborg & Life

@@@Marriage@@@
When people who were married on earth meet again in the afterlife, if they were truly of one mind, their marriage will continue in heaven. However, if the two people were not truly compatible, they will gradually separate of their own accord.

Swedenborg writes that all angels have a perfect match—we could think of it as a “soul mate,” although he never used that term—and if the two don’t meet on earth, they will find each other in heaven:

“Throughout heaven, people who are similar gather together and people who are dissimilar part company. This means that every community consists of like-minded people. Like are drawn toward like not by their own will but by the Lord. In the same way, spouse is drawn toward spouse when their minds can be united as one. So at first sight they love each other most deeply, see each other as married partners, and enter into their marriage.” (Heaven and Hell §383)

Swedenborg describes both betrothals and marriages in heaven. During the course of a marriage, because of the way that people’s minds are open to each other in the spiritual world, the partners gradually enter into each other’s thoughts and affections until they become like a single person. In fact, Swedenborg says that “two spouses living in heaven are not called two angels but one angel” (Heaven and Hell §367).

Angelic marriages of this kind are eternal. What God joins together, he keeps together, forever.

Related video: Spiritual Marriage- Swedenborg & Life

@@@Demons and Evil Spirits@@@
Like angels, all demons (whom Swedenborg refers to as “devils,” “satans,” or “evil spirits” in his writings) were once human beings living on earth. But as the people who would become angels gradually allowed themselves to be filled with divine love, elevating themselves to higher spiritual planes, the people who would become evil spirits did the opposite. The latter are people who are so immersed in physical pleasures, or bound up in their own egos, that they refuse to let them go. In fact, they choose to go to hell because they’re attracted to it; hell is the place where they can indulge in everything that gives them pleasure.  

Those who are in hell also gather together in communities of people who are alike, but it’s nothing like the cooperative effort of heaven’s communities. Communities in hell, as Swedenborg describes them, are ruled through fear and manipulation, with everyone constantly striving and scheming for power over others. There is no love or even friendship for others, only temporary alliances based on what spirits think they can gain from each other.  

By nature, self-love runs wild to the extent that its reins are loosened, that is, to the extent that the outward restraints constituted by fears of the law and its penalties, fears of losing reputation, esteem, profit, position, and life are taken away. It runs wild even to the extent of wanting to rule not only over the whole globe but even over all heaven and the Lord himself. It knows no bound or limit. This is latent in everyone who is focused on self-love even though it may not show in the world, where the restraints we have mentioned hold it back. 

We cannot fail to see this in people in power and kings who are not held back by any such restraints. They run wild and conquer as many territories and kingdoms as they can and aspire to boundless power and glory. . . .  

Picture a community made up of people like this, all totally in love with themselves, not caring about others unless they are allies, and you will see that their love is no different from that of thieves for each other. To the extent that they are acting in concert, they embrace each other and call each other friends; but once they stop cooperating, once anyone resists their control, they attack and butcher each other. If their deeper natures—their minds—are probed, it will be clear that they are full of virulent hatred for each other, that at heart they ridicule anything fair and honest and even ridicule the Deity, tossing it aside as worthless.  (Heaven and Hell §§559-60) 

The spirits in hell don’t suffer external punishments inflicted on them by God; they torture each other because that’s their nature. They have all the intelligence and perception that they had on earth and none of the restraints that would have stopped them from hurting others. However, Swedenborg also reports that the people in hell are happy there, and even if they were lifted up to heaven, they would be miserable or even in pain and have to return. In this way, God’s love extends to making even the worst of us as happy as they can be. 

###Free Will###

On the surface, free will might seem like an odd spiritual topic. Except in extraordinary circumstances, we have control over our bodies; we can move around and speak voluntarily, and we can also think whatever we want, even if circumstances prevent us from expressing those thoughts. But spiritual free will is another matter entirely, as Swedenborg explains:

It is generally recognized that we have a freedom to think and intend whatever we wish but not a freedom to say whatever we think or to do whatever we wish. The freedom under discussion here, then, is freedom on the spiritual level and not freedom on the earthly level, except to the extent that the two coincide. Thinking and intending are spiritual, while speaking and acting are earthly.

There is a clear distinction between these kinds of freedom in us, since we can think things that we do not express and intend things that we do not act out; so we can see that the spiritual and the earthly in us are differentiated. As a result, we cannot cross the line from one to the other except by making a decision, a decision that can be compared to a door that has first to be unlocked and opened. (Divine Providence §71)

Thinking and intending—which those familiar with Swedenborg’s thought might also recognize as willing and understanding—may not seem like inherently spiritual activities, but he emphasizes that the ability to make rational choices is the cornerstone of spiritual development, or regeneration. Our spiritual state isn’t simply the result of a single action or decision; it comes with years and years of consistently choosing one path over another. 

For example, in the book A Christmas Carol, Ebenezer Scrooge spends years inflicting suffering on others for his own profit, until one night he’s confronted with the consequences of his actions and has a change of heart. That’s great, Swedenborg might say, but by consistently choosing to put his greed first, Scrooge has done spiritual damage to himself. It’ll take a lot of internal work—consistently trying to do good—before he can really turn himself around. 

Whatever we choose to do freely becomes a part of us. Swedenborg tells us that a rational choice—one that comes from considering our options and everything that we’ve learned—has more spiritual impact than an impulsive action. And actions that we’re forced to take against our will have the least impact of all. In the same way, people who aren’t able to make rational decisions, whether it’s because of mental or physical illness or due to more fleeting conditions like rage or intoxication, aren’t held spiritually responsible for their actions—even though they might be held responsible on a personal or criminal level!

But why give people free will at all? If you were a supreme deity setting out to design a universe, would you allow people to have the choice to hurt each other? Or, to put it another way, why create a world where innocent people suffer at the hands of evil people? 

Now you might suppose that the free choice granted to human beings in spiritual matters is a mediate cause of evil, and therefore that if free choice of this kind had not been granted to us, we would not be able to sin. But, my friend, stop for a moment here and consider whether any human being could be created so as to be human without having free choice in spiritual matters. If this were taken away from us, we would be statues and no longer human. (True Christianity §489:2)

That’s the first part of Swedenborg’s answer: the ability to make conscious decisions is what makes us human. If we weren’t able to think, feel, and decide what to do, or not to do, then we’d be no different from a rock. 

The second part of Swedenborg’s answer has to do with why we were created that way: the purpose of humanity—in fact, the purpose of the whole universe—is for us to all have the potential to go to heaven, where we can live with God forever. In Swedenborg’s cosmology, heaven isn’t just clouds and harps; it’s a vast community of souls who consistently chose love over hate, and who are bound together by all the different types of love that they have for every living thing. God wants that community to keep growing forever, and so he’s always trying to find ways to draw us toward it. 

[I]f we on the earthly level were deprived of the freedom to intend evil and to make it seem reasonable by rationalizations, that would be the end of our freedom and rationality and of our volition and discernment. We could not be led away from our evils and reformed, so we could not be united with the Lord and live forever. That is why the Lord protects our freedom the way we protect the pupil of our eye. The Lord, though, is constantly using our freedom to lead us away from our evils, and to the extent that he can do so through our freedom, he uses that freedom to plant good things within us. In this way, step by step he gives us heavenly freedom in place of hellish freedom. (Divine Providence §97)

But in order for this to work, people must be able to understand the difference between good and evil—which sometimes means experiencing evil firsthand so that we can clearly see the consequences of evil actions—and then we must be able to freely choose to be good. Only then have we made love a part of who we are, and when that happens, we’re on the road to heaven.

The Lord is present with us through our human freedom, in that freedom, and with that freedom, constantly urging us to receive him but at the same time never removing or taking away our freedom, since . . . no spiritual action that we have taken stays with us unless we freely chose to take it. Therefore you could say that our freedom is where the Lord dwells with us in our soul. (True Christianity §498)

###Divine Providence###
It’s a question that people have wrestled with for ages: Why would an all-powerful God, one whose essence is literally love and wisdom, allow evil and suffering to exist in the world?

Swedenborg devotes an entire book to answering this question: Divine Providence. In it, he explains that the Lord’s goal is the formation of a heavenly community, bringing everyone—every human being on earth—into heaven. Divine providence is the way he works to do that. But he will not do this without our freely given consent and cooperation. In other words, there can be no true salvation without free will; nor can there be a full commitment to spiritual growth without first understanding the role that evil plays in our lives.

@@@The Laws of Divine Providence@@@
Swedenborg systematically describes the way that divine providence works in our lives by condensing it into five laws:

1. We should act in freedom and in accordance with reason
Freedom, in this case, means spiritual freedom. Our bodies limit what we can see and hear and do. Governments have laws that prevent us from acting in certain ways. But in the privacy of our own minds, we can think and feel just about any way that we like. In other words, we can choose to inwardly embrace thoughts and feelings that are either good or evil. Swedenborg tells us:

The origin of evil is the abuse of the abilities proper to us called rationality and freedom. By rationality, I mean the ability to discern what is true and therefore what is false, and to discern what is good and therefore what is evil. By freedom, I mean the ability freely to think, intend, and to do such things. (Divine Love and Wisdom #264)

The actions that we choose—and, more importantly, the underlying attitudes that motivate those actions—become a part of us. Swedenborg may have anticipated modern psychology when he observed that the thoughts and feelings we embrace never truly leave us. We may repress them, or deny them, but the thoughts and feelings that we dwell upon become part of our essential self. Ancient wisdom teaches, “For as he thinks in his heart, so is he” (Proverbs 23:7). Swedenborg takes it a step further, saying that “we are what we love.” (Divine Love and Wisdom #1). The more we are motivated by and act upon our noblest desires, the more that nobility becomes a part of our very being. This is the way we cooperate, connect, and come into communion with God. But it must be done freely, and we must make that decision rationally rather than acting out of fear or external pressure.

2. We should reject any tendencies toward evil that we notice coming into our mind
What is evil? In its most basic form, it refers to any desire or any tendency to turn away from God, or from the highest principles we know. Swedenborg describes angels as perpetually turned toward God—not in the literal sense of always facing the same direction no matter which way they’re walking, but in the spiritual sense that their minds, their inner selves, are always guided by the Lord’s love and wisdom. In the same way, he says, evil spirits are always turned away from God, guided by their own obsessions with power and prestige.

We should not think of “evil spirits” as medieval characters in fictional literature. They are real influences masquerading as our thoughts and feelings. While these thoughts and feelings may feel like our own, they do not become a part of us until we identify with them, embrace them, and lead our lives by them.

The process of noticing the negative thoughts and feelings that arise in our minds, and then rejecting them, begins on earth. This is a basic aspect of our common humanity. None of us is born “perfect,” but we can strive to become better. As Swedenborg notes, we are all born with a tendency to be selfish and to crave material pleasures. And yet, more deeply, we are also born with an inner spiritual essence that comes from God. In Hindusim this is called “Atman”; in Buddhism it is our “Buddha nature”; and in Swedenborg’s theology it is “the innermost.” It is in this “innermost” part of us where we connect with God, allow God to guide us, and become cooperative channels through whom God’s love and truth can flow.

When Swedenborg talks about rejecting evils, then, he is talking about our tendency to be selfish—to always act in what we regard as our own best interest rather than our neighbors’; to love power and crave domination over others; to steal, or kill, or otherwise do harm.

But what we do isn’t the whole story. Why we do it goes deeper. For example, let’s say that a man working for a large corporation—overworked, underpaid, and perpetually mistreated by his tyrant of a boss—discovers a loophole that will allow him to steal money from the company without anyone noticing. Over the course of a couple of years, he’s stockpiled enough money to quit and start his own business. No big deal, he tells himself. Nobody got hurt. The corporation is so large that nobody even noticed the money was missing. Anyhow, he deserves the money as compensation for the way he was treated.

Though it may not seem like a big deal, this kind of rationalization and justification of actions that we know are wrong (rather than acknowledging and rejecting them) leads us away from the Lord. The more we tell ourselves that it’s okay to help ourselves at others’ expense, the farther away we get.

However, if instead we make a concerted effort to reject those selfish thoughts and feelings, try to make amends for past actions, and truly work to become better people, we open the door for God to enter our lives and put us on the path to heaven.

3. We cannot be compelled to think or believe in a certain way
Swedenborg asserts that nobody can be reformed by threats and punishments, or even by miracles and visions of the afterlife. In order for faith to be real, and for reformation to be actual, we have to examine ourselves in the light of our highest values and see if we are living in accordance with them. It is only when we choose to act consciously in accordance with our faith that the process of reformation really begins.

An external event like a miracle may make a big impression, and it may even force us to rethink our beliefs. However, “force” is the key word here. If we have a vision of God telling us to go help the poor, we may feel compelled to do so simply because of the overwhelming experience we’ve just had. It’s no different from acting to help others because an authority figure has told us that we must do so. If we have not consciously chosen to become a better person, to do good simply because it is good, then our inner selves are not changing—and deep inside is where it really counts. What we actually do doesn’t matter if we’re motivated by fear or external pressure.

For the same reason, people who have mental illnesses, or who suffer from some other disability that prevents them using their freedom and rationality, are not held spiritually responsible for their actions. This also includes emergency situations where a person is acting out of instinct or desperation, or times and places where people are genuinely ignorant of spiritual truths.

4. We are taught and led by the Lord, although it may appear that we are acting independently
In many places throughout his writings, Swedenborg emphasizes that all life comes from God, that his love, wisdom, and energy flow into everything. If God were to withdraw from anyone, even for a moment, that person would simply cease to exist. Because of this, even people who have chosen to do evil still have God’s presence in their lives, sustaining them. God never stops trying to lead people to do good things and to love each other, and as long as we are on earth it’s never too late to change. (Although the longer we wait, the harder it gets!)

5. We will not feel the workings of divine providence in our lives
We are not allowed to see God at work in our lives for the same reason that we can’t be converted to faith by miracles: we have to choose to do good because we truly believe it is right, not because we are forced to or because there will be an immediate reward for doing so.

That’s why some people choose to abandon their belief in God. They are looking for an immediate reward—or even an eventual reward—for being good, and are disappointed when they do not see divine providence working in their lives. They do not realize that the God “who neither slumbers nor sleeps” is always working in their lives, bringing the best out of everything that happens, no matter how dark the moment appears to be. This is a hard but important lesson—especially when there has been a serious misfortune. Sometimes it’s not until long after the fact that the lessons we learned or the positive results that ensued become clear.

@@@Disasters and Personal Suffering@@@
But what about innocent people who are doing their best to lead good lives and yet still suffer misfortune? What about natural disasters like floods and earthquakes that kill thousands of people? What kind of lessons do we learn from that?

The evils in the world are real, Swedenborg says, but are permitted to happen so that we can grow:

Saying that God allows something to happen does not mean that he wants it to happen but that he cannot prevent it because of his goal, which is our salvation. . . . [Divine providence] is constantly focused on its goal; so that every moment of its work, at every single step of its course, when it notices that we are straying from that goal it leads and turns and adapts us in accord with its laws, leading us away from evil and toward good. . . . This cannot be accomplished without allowing bad things to happen. (Divine Providence #234)

Following a natural disaster, there might be an outpouring of love and support that inspires people to treat everyone better. Perhaps a person who helps during this time might decide to dedicate their lives to helping others, affecting thousands of lives for the better. Technologies may be developed that prevent bigger disasters down the road. With our limited perspective, it’s impossible to see all the positive consequences that might arise from a personal crisis or natural disaster. Part of faith is learning to trust, as Swedenborg assures us, that the Lord will not allow anything to happen if it cannot eventually be turned to good (Secrets of Heaven #6574).

Disaster, crime, disease, and other misfortunes also force us to confront the fact that evil exists in the world. When everything is going well, when there is peace and prosperity and nobody is suffering, we tend to take things for granted. We relax and enjoy the good times without thinking too much about it. Disasters make us realize what’s important to us; they wake us up to the fact that we matter to each other. From that starting point, we can think about who we are and, more importantly, who we want to be. Ultimately, if we let them, even the worst events in life can be the first step on the path to heaven.

###The Bible###
One of the most important elements of Swedenborg’s theology is the principle that the Bible has an inner, spiritual meaning encoded within the text. He says that the Bible was never meant to be taken purely or even primarily in a literal sense, and he points out that the text is often confusing or even contradictory if taken literally. Rather, Swedenborg asserts, the Bible should be read as a multilayered description of the spiritual realities within us and in the world beyond.

@@@Sacred Scripture@@@
Swedenborg describes the relationship between the literal and spiritual meanings of the Bible in his short work Sacred Scripture, where he describes the text of the Bible as a means to connect with deep spiritual truths:

It is characteristic of the Word’s style that there is something holy in every statement, even in every word, even at times in the letters themselves; so the Word unites us to the Lord and opens heaven.

There are two things that emanate from the Lord, divine love and divine wisdom . . . In its essence, the Word is both, and since, as already stated, it unites us with the Lord and opens heaven, the Word fills us with good desires that come from love and fills our understanding with truths that lead to wisdom, provided we read it with the help of the Lord and not just on our own. It fills our will with good desires that come from love and fills our understanding with truths that lead to wisdom. As a result, we gain life by means of the Word. (Sacred Scripture #3)

@@@Biblical Interpretation@@@
The Bible can be read on a literal level, Swedenborg says, and those teachings provide the foundation for understanding its inner meaning:

The first task [of those who seek enlightenment when they read the Word] is to put together a body of teaching for themselves from the literal meaning of the Word. That is how they light a lamp in order to go further. Once they have put together a body of teaching and lit the lamp, they see the Word in the light of that lamp. (Sacred Scripture #59)

However, at the same time the text can be interpreted using a system of correspondences that reveal the spiritual meanings behind the words. For example, Swedenborg tells us that the story of Creation at the beginning of Genesis is actually the story of our creation as spiritual people—that is, it’s the story of how we can go from being completely focused on ourselves and the world around us to being caring people who manifest God’s love and wisdom as much and as often as we can. (For more about this, see our page on regeneration or read this passage in Swedenborg’s own words.)

@@@Theological Foundation@@@
In his first theological work, Secrets of Heaven, Swedenborg sets out to demonstrate exactly how this system works by going through the Bible verse by verse, sometimes word by word, and explaining the spiritual correspondence behind what is written there. In eight Latin volumes (twelve or fifteen volumes in English translation), he gets as far as the end of Exodus. He seems originally to have intended to eventually go through the entire Bible, but the only other book that he examines at that level of detail is the book of Revelation.

Swedenborg’s reading of the inner sense of the Bible was the foundation of his own theology, and it provided the inspiration for his view of the Lord and a unique model of spiritual growth or regeneration.

###Correspondences###
In Swedenborg’s cosmology, all of creation has a divinely established order that starts at the very top (the Lord) and extends down through the heavens and the world of spirits until it reaches the natural world, which is the level at which things have physical existence.

Each of these levels is a less-perfect reflection of the one above it. Heaven is a manifestation of the Lord, but its inhabitants are not as spiritually pure, and therefore it isn’t a perfect manifestation. The world of spirits, the intermediate realm between our world and heaven, is a lower level where there may be both good and evil spirits; because it is so close to the physical world, it resembles our world visually, and so spiritual substance appears as objects we would find familiar. In our natural world, we are so grounded in physical matter that we can barely perceive spiritual realities at all, but our physical reality is still a reflection of what goes on in the spiritual world.

An example of this is the sun. In the spiritual world, Swedenborg says, the omnipresent radiance of Divinity is compared to the sun of the natural world. The divine love that permeates the universe is like the heat of the sun, and the divine wisdom that provides order to everything in the universe is compared to the light of the sun. Together, the heat of divine love and the light of divine wisdom permeate everything that exists, sustaining all living things in both the spiritual and natural worlds.

While it may seem that all things of the natural world are sustained merely by the heat and light of the natural sun, Swedenborg calls this an appearance. In actuality, the sun of the natural world is a manifestation of divine love and wisdom. In other words, even though it seems to us like the sun is doing the work, Swedenborg says, it’s actually God’s love and wisdom that sustains life here also. If God’s presence were withdrawn from anything—even for a moment—it would simply cease to exist. And that goes for each of us as well!

So the sun in our natural world is a reflection of the sun in the spiritual world. By observing the way the heat and light of the sun interact with nature as we experience it through our senses, we can start to understand how love and wisdom work in the world of our inner spirit.

For example, when we say that someone has a “sunny disposition,” we are speaking in what Swedenborg calls “the language of correspondence.” God’s love is shining through that person. Similarly, when we say “now I see the light,” or “that person is quite enlightened,” we are using correspondential language to describe how God’s wisdom is manifesting in people.

It’s more than mere symbols; “correspondence,” as Swedenborg uses the term, is about a real, dynamic, ongoing relationship between divine love and human love, divine wisdom and human enlightenment.

So far we have only spoken about the sun because it is the most basic and most universal correspondence. However, it’s not just the sun that relates in this way. Swedenborg tells us that everything in this world is caused by a spiritual counterpart:

Nothing can exist anywhere in the material world that does not have a correspondence with the spiritual world—because if it did, it would have no cause that would make it come into being and then allow it to continue in existence. Everything in the material world is an effect. The causes of all effects lie in the spiritual world, and the causes of those causes in turn (which are the purposes those causes serve) lie in a still deeper heaven. (Secrets of Heaven #5711)

While it can be easy to see this as a static relationship—light always equals wisdom, water always equals truth, and so on—this is actually a dynamic relationship. Think about the way that your emotions are revealed in your facial expression. Emotions aren’t a physical thing—there’s no way to take them out of your head and look at them—but we can often tell what another person is feeling by observing the corresponding expression. Similarly, we can’t know what other people are thinking, but they can express their thoughts by speaking. The sincerely spoken word is a correspondence of the thought. The simple words “I love you” can correspond to a whole world of inner feeling.

Swedenborg goes into great detail about correspondences, especially about how the human body corresponds to heaven. You can read more about this on our page about the Universal Human.

@@@Inner Meaning of the Bible@@@
Swedenborg uses correspondences to interpret the Bible in a whole new light. He says that the Bible was never meant to be taken purely or even primarily in a literal sense, and he points out that it often doesn’t make much sense as a literal document. According to Swedenborg, the Bible should be read as a spiritual guidebook, not an instruction manual.

This is one of Swedenborg’s most important points, and something that distinguished him from the theologians of his day: the Bible is written in such a way that we can understand the spiritual truths behind the actual written words—truths that open up for us when we are ready to receive them.

In his first theological work, Secrets of Heaven, Swedenborg sets out to demonstrate exactly what he means by going through the Bible verse by verse, sometimes word by word, and explaining the spiritual correspondence behind what is written there. In eight Latin volumes (twelve or fifteen volumes in English translation), he gets as far as the end of Exodus. He seems originally to have intended to eventually go through the entire Bible, but the only other book that he examines at that level of detail is the book of Revelation.

As an example of how he uses correspondences to interpret the Bible, Swedenborg tells us that the story of Creation at the beginning of Genesis is actually the story of our creation as spiritual people—that is, it’s the story of how we can go from being completely focused on ourselves and the world around us to being caring people who manifest God’s love and wisdom as much and as often as we can. (For more about this, see our page on regeneration or read this passage in Swedenborg’s own words.)

###Universal Human###
In his writings, Swedenborg often repeats the idea that heaven has a human form, a concept that he calls the Maximus Homo. This is a Latin term that can be translated “Universal Human,” or, in older translations, “Grand Man.” (It should be noted that in Latin the word homo is gender neutral, so when some translations identify this figure as masculine, they’re introducing a bias that didn’t exist in the original.) This concept includes the idea that God can be understood as infinitely human, possessing every human capacity we can imagine. In other words, Swedenborg invites us to think of the Infinite Divine in terms of the human form.

This is where the idea that “we are made in the image of God” comes from. This well-known biblical concept is, as we shall see, a fundamental way of understanding the universe.

Swedenborg also invites us to think of heaven in this way as well. He tells us that angels in heaven live in communities, and that those communities each perform a function that corresponds to an organ in the human body. Together, all of the angelic communities form a single unit that is the Universal Human.

@@@What Does It Mean to Be Human?@@@
To really understand this, it’s important to first understand that when Swedenborg says “human,” he’s not talking about our literal physical form:

No one should think that we are human because we have a human face, a human body, a brain, and all the other organs and limbs. We share things like these with brute animals, so they are the things that die and are put in the grave. No, what makes a person human is the ability to think and will as a human and therefore to receive attributes that are divine, or the Lord’s. This is what distinguishes us from animals tame and wild. In the other world, the way we received those attributes and made them our own during bodily life determines the kind of human being we become. (Secrets of Heaven #4219)

When Swedenborg talks about a human body, he’s talking about the functions that the body performs: taking things in, keeping what’s useful to sustain our lives, and eliminating the rest. In the same way, the Universal Human is not a literal giant human being made of angels walking around up in the sky, but rather myriad communities working together and performing functions like those that take place in a human body.

By this ‘human’ to whom useful functions relate, I mean not only an individual but also groups of people and smaller and larger communities such as republics and monarchies and empires and even that largest community that comprises the whole world, since all of these are human. So too in the heavens the whole angelic heaven is like a single individual in the Lord’s sight, and so is each individual community of heaven. This is why each individual angel is human. (Divine Love and Wisdom #328)

@@@Parts of the Universal Human@@@
In his writings, and particularly in Secrets of Heaven, Swedenborg goes into detail about what types of people constitute the different “organs” of the Universal Human. A good example of how the system works is the digestive system, which he relates to the process of dying in this world and crossing into the spiritual world.

The mouth, Swedenborg says, is a gateway into the spiritual world. Once people enter, at any time they might be absorbed into the body—that is, taken into heaven. But some people are a bit tougher (think about tough food that has to be thoroughly chewed before it can be swallowed and digested). These kinds of people may have been very self-centered while they were in the world, or focused on material gain; they may have been the type of people who sought out power in order to dominate and manipulate others, and they may even have been very cruel people who enjoyed inflicting pain. These people move down the esophagus into the stomach, where they begin to encounter angels who help them confront who they really are inside.

People who realize that they have committed evil in the world, repent, and allow the good energy of the Lord to flow into them—that is, people who leave behind the parts of themselves that aren’t “nutritious”—will be taken into the body of heaven and carried off to the community where they will live and work. Those who continue to resist will move on to the intestines for further digestion. Angels will keep working with them, but if a person truly loves evil and has no interest in goodness, then that person can’t become part of the body of heaven. Eventually, such people enter the “rectum” of the Universal Human, and from there are expelled into hell.

The two most important organs of the body are the heart and lungs, and likewise the two most important parts of heaven are the angelic communities that correspond to the heart and lungs. The “heart” community corresponds to the celestial heaven or the heavenly kingdom, the part of heaven that is closest to the Lord. The heart represents love and also the will or volition, that is, the part of our minds that moves us and causes us to take action. The lungs correspond to the spiritual heaven or spiritual kingdom of heaven, which is slightly farther from the Lord. Lungs (or, more specifically, the air that they circulate) represent the Lord’s wisdom, which flows throughout the universe just as his love does. Lungs also correspond to the part of the mind known as discernment (also translated intellect or understanding), which is the part of the mind where we process information, store memories, and think and draw conclusions.

Just as a human body cannot survive without a fully functioning heart and lungs, heaven cannot continue to exist without the communities that circulate love and wisdom throughout the spiritual world, and through the spiritual world into our world.

Swedenborg describes the correspondence of other organs too. For example, the angels of the nose are people who excel at telling the difference between good and evil; they have, as we might say in idiomatic English, a “nose” for it. When someone says, “I smell trouble,” or “Joe has a nose for news,” we understand that this means they have a special sensitivity or intuitive ability in these areas.

Similarly, angels who belong to communities that correspond to the function of the ear are ones who hear and obey without thinking too hard about what they’ve been told; angels who belong to communities that correspond to the function of the eyes are ones who understand the truth and the good things that come from faith. When we say, “I see,” we do not always mean that we are seeing a physical object. Often it means, “I understand.” Angels who belong to communities that correspond to the function of the hands and arms are the angels who have power because they give credit for everything to God; since they have no obstructing self-importance, there’s nothing to stop God’s energy from flowing through them and manifesting in the spiritual world.

Just as there are many types of people, there are many types of work that angels can do in heaven, and each different function becomes a useful part of the whole. Here on earth, too, each member of a community has the potential to fulfill a particular role and thereby be useful to others—an important part of spiritual growth. The spiritual lesson of the Universal Human, then, is that we, like the various parts of our own body, should find ways to provide a useful function in human society. At the same time, we can appreciate the many and diverse ways in which other people are playing their role in helping us. When everyone works together in harmony, moved by divine love and guided by divine wisdom, there is an image of God—the Maximus Homo, or Universal Human.

